docs/faster-whisper-benchmark.md, before:

# Faster-Whisper Benchmark Analysis

This document summarizes the benchmark comparison between OpenAI Whisper and faster-whisper for podcast transcription.

## Executive Summary

**Recommendation: Use faster-whisper with the medium model.**

After extensive benchmarking and transcript comparison, faster-whisper provides:
- **1.5-2.6x faster transcription** depending on model size
- **Equal or better accuracy** than standard Whisper
- **Fewer hallucinations** in some cases
- **Better medical/technical terminology** handling (medium model)

## Test Environment

- **Hardware**: NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090
- **Audio Sample**: 13.8-minute podcast episode
- **Podcast**: [Up First from NPR](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510318/up-first)
- **Episode**: "Autism and Tylenol, Jimmy Kimmel Returns, Trump At The UN"
- **Date**: December 7, 2025
- **Models Tested**: large-v3, medium, small, tiny

## Benchmark Results

### Performance Comparison

| Model | Whisper Time | faster-whisper Time | Speedup | Word Similarity |
|-------|-------------|---------------------|---------|-----------------|
| **large-v3** | 77.09s | 29.72s | **2.59x** | 92.63% |
| **medium** | 32.96s | 21.01s | **1.57x** | 95.95% |
| **small** | 18.34s | 11.89s | **1.54x** | 95.91% |
| **tiny** | 8.92s | 6.61s | **1.35x** | 94.31% |

### Model Load Times

| Model | Whisper | faster-whisper | Improvement |
|-------|---------|----------------|-------------|
| large-v3 | 9.67s | 1.73s | 5.6x faster |
| medium | 13.88s | 3.89s | 3.6x faster |
| small | 1.20s | 1.72s | 0.7x (slower) |
| tiny | 1.09s | 0.87s | 1.3x faster |

### Realtime Factors (Lower is Better)

| Model | Whisper | faster-whisper |
|-------|---------|----------------|
| large-v3 | 0.093x | 0.036x |
| medium | 0.040x | 0.025x |
| small | 0.022x | 0.014x |
| tiny | 0.011x | 0.008x |

## Transcript Quality Analysis

### Large-v3 Model (95-97% similar)

**Findings:**
- Faster-whisper **avoided hallucinations** present in Whisper (repeated word patterns)
- One medical term variation: "phalanic acid" vs "folinic acid"
- Both struggle with challenging proper names
- Faster-whisper produced more coherent output in some passages

**Verdict:** Suitable replacement - may actually be more reliable due to fewer hallucinations.

### Medium Model (98-99% similar) - RECOMMENDED

**Findings:**
- Faster-whisper was **MORE accurate** in several cases:
  - Correct medical terminology ("leucovorin" and "folinic acid")
  - Better grammar ("leaders of the U.S." vs "leaders at the U.S.")
  - Corrected transcription errors ("NPR's" vs Whisper's "NPS")
- No significant omissions
- Minimal formatting differences

**Verdict:** Excellent replacement - actually improves accuracy while being faster.

### Small Model (98-99% similar)

**Findings:**
- Faster-whisper correctly transcribed "ideological spectrum" (Whisper had "audiological spectrum")
- One minor omission: Missing a sponsor segment opening line
- More filler words captured ("uh")
- Name transcription varies between both

**Verdict:** Suitable replacement with minor caveats about completeness.

### Tiny Model (95-97% similar)

**Findings:**
- Both models struggle with proper names at this model size
- Minor word substitutions ("claim" → "clean")
- All major content segments preserved
- Adequate for RAG where semantic meaning matters more than exact words

**Verdict:** Suitable replacement for non-critical applications.

## Key Insights

### Faster-Whisper Advantages

1. **Speed**: 1.5-2.6x faster transcription across all model sizes
2. **Model Loading**: Up to 5.6x faster model initialization
3. **Accuracy**: Equal or better, especially with medium model
4. **Hallucination Resistance**: Fewer instances of repeated/nonsensical text
5. **Technical Terms**: Better handling of medical and scientific terminology

### Considerations

1. **cuDNN Requirement**: Requires NVIDIA cuDNN libraries for GPU acceleration
2. **Library Path**: Must set `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` to include cuDNN location
3. **Memory**: Uses CTranslate2 backend with lower memory footprint

## Setup Requirements

### Installation

```bash
# Install faster-whisper
pip install faster-whisper

# Install NVIDIA cuDNN libraries (for GPU support)
pip install nvidia-cublas-cu12 nvidia-cudnn-cu12
```

### Environment Configuration

For GPU acceleration, set the library path before running:

```bash
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/path/to/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages/nvidia/cudnn/lib:/path/to/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages/nvidia/cublas/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

Or add to your shell configuration file (~/.bashrc, ~/.zshrc).

## Usage

### Basic Usage

```python
from faster_whisper import WhisperModel

# Load model (medium recommended)
model = WhisperModel("medium", device="cuda", compute_type="float16")

# Transcribe
segments, info = model.transcribe(
    "audio.mp3",
    beam_size=5,
    language="en",
    vad_filter=True,  # Filter silence
)

# Get transcript text
transcript = " ".join(segment.text.strip() for segment in segments)
```

### CPU Usage

For CPU, use int8 compute type:

```python
model = WhisperModel("medium", device="cpu", compute_type="int8")
```

## Recommendation

**Use the medium model with faster-whisper** for the podcast RAG pipeline:

| Criteria | Medium Model Performance |
|----------|-------------------------|
| Speed | 1.57x faster than Whisper |
| Accuracy | 98-99% word similarity |
| Quality | Actually MORE accurate in tests |
| Memory | Lower footprint with CTranslate2 |
| Reliability | Fewer hallucinations |

The medium model provides the best balance of:
- Processing speed for large podcast libraries
- Transcript accuracy for RAG retrieval
- Resource efficiency for production deployment

## Benchmark Script

The benchmark script is available at `scripts/benchmark_faster_whisper.py`:

```bash
# Run benchmark
python scripts/benchmark_faster_whisper.py \
    --audio-file /path/to/audio.mp3 \
    --models large-v3,medium,small,tiny \
    --save-transcripts ./transcripts \
    --output benchmark_results.json
```

Commit message:

fix: Address additional CodeRabbit review feedback
- AGENTS.md: Update Tech Stack to mention faster-whisper explicitly
- transcription.py: Fix _transcribe_episode return type (str, not Optional)
- benchmark docs: Add note about Python version in LD_LIBRARY_PATH
- benchmark script: Make release_model() resilient to missing PyTorch
- benchmark script: Add validation for runs parameter (>= 1)

docs/faster-whisper-benchmark.md, after:

# Faster-Whisper Benchmark Analysis

This document summarizes the benchmark comparison between OpenAI Whisper and faster-whisper for podcast transcription.

## Executive Summary

**Recommendation: Use faster-whisper with the medium model.**

After extensive benchmarking and transcript comparison, faster-whisper provides:
- **1.5-2.6x faster transcription** depending on model size
- **Equal or better accuracy** than standard Whisper
- **Fewer hallucinations** in some cases
- **Better medical/technical terminology** handling (medium model)

## Test Environment

- **Hardware**: NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090
- **Audio Sample**: 13.8-minute podcast episode
- **Podcast**: [Up First from NPR](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510318/up-first)
- **Episode**: "Autism and Tylenol, Jimmy Kimmel Returns, Trump At The UN"
- **Date**: December 7, 2025
- **Models Tested**: large-v3, medium, small, tiny

## Benchmark Results

### Performance Comparison

| Model | Whisper Time | faster-whisper Time | Speedup | Word Similarity |
|-------|-------------|---------------------|---------|-----------------|
| **large-v3** | 77.09s | 29.72s | **2.59x** | 92.63% |
| **medium** | 32.96s | 21.01s | **1.57x** | 95.95% |
| **small** | 18.34s | 11.89s | **1.54x** | 95.91% |
| **tiny** | 8.92s | 6.61s | **1.35x** | 94.31% |

### Model Load Times

| Model | Whisper | faster-whisper | Improvement |
|-------|---------|----------------|-------------|
| large-v3 | 9.67s | 1.73s | 5.6x faster |
| medium | 13.88s | 3.89s | 3.6x faster |
| small | 1.20s | 1.72s | 0.7x (slower) |
| tiny | 1.09s | 0.87s | 1.3x faster |

### Realtime Factors (Lower is Better)

| Model | Whisper | faster-whisper |
|-------|---------|----------------|
| large-v3 | 0.093x | 0.036x |
| medium | 0.040x | 0.025x |
| small | 0.022x | 0.014x |
| tiny | 0.011x | 0.008x |

## Transcript Quality Analysis

### Large-v3 Model (95-97% similar)

**Findings:**
- Faster-whisper **avoided hallucinations** present in Whisper (repeated word patterns)
- One medical term variation: "phalanic acid" vs "folinic acid"
- Both struggle with challenging proper names
- Faster-whisper produced more coherent output in some passages

**Verdict:** Suitable replacement - may actually be more reliable due to fewer hallucinations.

### Medium Model (98-99% similar) - RECOMMENDED

**Findings:**
- Faster-whisper was **MORE accurate** in several cases:
  - Correct medical terminology ("leucovorin" and "folinic acid")
  - Better grammar ("leaders of the U.S." vs "leaders at the U.S.")
  - Corrected transcription errors ("NPR's" vs Whisper's "NPS")
- No significant omissions
- Minimal formatting differences

**Verdict:** Excellent replacement - actually improves accuracy while being faster.

### Small Model (98-99% similar)

**Findings:**
- Faster-whisper correctly transcribed "ideological spectrum" (Whisper had "audiological spectrum")
- One minor omission: Missing a sponsor segment opening line
- More filler words captured ("uh")
- Name transcription varies between both

**Verdict:** Suitable replacement with minor caveats about completeness.

### Tiny Model (95-97% similar)

**Findings:**
- Both models struggle with proper names at this model size
- Minor word substitutions ("claim" → "clean")
- All major content segments preserved
- Adequate for RAG where semantic meaning matters more than exact words

**Verdict:** Suitable replacement for non-critical applications.

## Key Insights

### Faster-Whisper Advantages

1. **Speed**: 1.5-2.6x faster transcription across all model sizes
2. **Model Loading**: Up to 5.6x faster model initialization
3. **Accuracy**: Equal or better, especially with medium model
4. **Hallucination Resistance**: Fewer instances of repeated/nonsensical text
5. **Technical Terms**: Better handling of medical and scientific terminology

### Considerations

1. **cuDNN Requirement**: Requires NVIDIA cuDNN libraries for GPU acceleration
2. **Library Path**: Must set `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` to include cuDNN location
3. **Memory**: Uses CTranslate2 backend with lower memory footprint

## Setup Requirements

### Installation

```bash
# Install faster-whisper
pip install faster-whisper

# Install NVIDIA cuDNN libraries (for GPU support)
pip install nvidia-cublas-cu12 nvidia-cudnn-cu12
```

### Environment Configuration

For GPU acceleration, set the library path before running:

```bash
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/path/to/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages/nvidia/cudnn/lib:/path/to/.venv/lib/python3.12/site-packages/nvidia/cublas/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

**Note:** Adjust the Python version in the path (e.g., `python3.11` vs `python3.12`) to match your local environment.

Or add to your shell configuration file (~/.bashrc, ~/.zshrc).

## Usage

### Basic Usage

```python
from faster_whisper import WhisperModel

# Load model (medium recommended)
model = WhisperModel("medium", device="cuda", compute_type="float16")

# Transcribe
segments, info = model.transcribe(
    "audio.mp3",
    beam_size=5,
    language="en",
    vad_filter=True,  # Filter silence
)

# Get transcript text
transcript = " ".join(segment.text.strip() for segment in segments)
```

### CPU Usage

For CPU, use int8 compute type:

```python
model = WhisperModel("medium", device="cpu", compute_type="int8")
```

## Recommendation

**Use the medium model with faster-whisper** for the podcast RAG pipeline:

| Criteria | Medium Model Performance |
|----------|-------------------------|
| Speed | 1.57x faster than Whisper |
| Accuracy | 98-99% word similarity |
| Quality | Actually MORE accurate in tests |
| Memory | Lower footprint with CTranslate2 |
| Reliability | Fewer hallucinations |

The medium model provides the best balance of:
- Processing speed for large podcast libraries
- Transcript accuracy for RAG retrieval
- Resource efficiency for production deployment

## Benchmark Script

The benchmark script is available at `scripts/benchmark_faster_whisper.py`:

```bash
# Run benchmark
python scripts/benchmark_faster_whisper.py \
    --audio-file /path/to/audio.mp3 \
    --models large-v3,medium,small,tiny \
    --save-transcripts ./transcripts \
    --output benchmark_results.json
```
